Hello there Ladies and Gentlemen, welcome to another episode of Cinema Summary.
Today we'll be looking at "Vanilla Sky" a 2001 science fiction psychological thriller.
Written, co-produced and directed by Cameron Crowe,
it is an English-language adaptation
of the Spanish film "Abre Los Ojos"
(It only took the Americans 4 years to copy and reproduce)
It stars Tom Cruise as a rich businessowner, David Ames, and
Penelope Cruz as a bookish young dancer named Sofia Serrano.
From a prison cell where he has been charged
with murder, David Aames (Tom Cruise), in
a prosthetic mask, tells his life story to
court psychologist, Dr. Curtis McCabe (Kurt
Russell).
In flashback, David is shown to be the wealthy
owner of a large publishing firm in New York
City which he inherited from his father, leaving
its regular duties to his father's trusted
associates.
As David enjoys the bachelor lifestyle, he
is introduced to Sofia Serrano (Penélope
Cruz) by his best friend, author Brian Shelby
(Jason Lee) at a party.
David and Sofia spend a night together talking
and fall in love.
When David's former lover, Julianna "Julie"
Gianni (Cameron Diaz), hears of Sofia, she
attempts to kill herself and David in a car
crash.
Julie dies but David survives, his face grotesquely
disfigured,[4]leading him to wear a mask to
hide the injuries.
With no hope of repairing the damage through
plastic surgery, David cannot come to grips
with the idea of wearing the mask for the
rest of his life.
On a night out with Sofia and Brian, David
gets hopelessly drunk and Sofia and Brian
leave him to wallow in the street outside.
At the start of the movie, when David wakes
up with Julie Gianni, her cell phone ringtone
is "Row, Row, Row Your Boat" but at the moment
she answers the call and the music stops,
the next lyric would have been "Life is but
a dream".
A hint to the mind-boggling nature of the
film.
Music is used similarly throughout the film,
I wonder if you can spot them?
David is awakened the next day in the street
by Sofia, who apologises for deserting him
the night before, and takes him home.
The two continue to see each other, and David
has his face surgically repaired despite being
told it was impossible before.
Though his life seems perfectly content, David
finds oddities, such as brief visions of his
distorted face, and a man at a bar (Noah Taylor)
that tells him David could control the world
and everyone in it, if he wanted to.
One day, when he goes to Sofia's apartment,
he finds Julie there instead; all of the previous
mementos of Sofia now show Julie's face.
Angry and confused, David suffocates Julie,
and is later arrested and placed in a mental
institution, finding his face has reverted
to its previously disfigured state.
David completes telling his story to Curtis,
who proceeds to then visit David further for
more sessions to try to help him recuperate.
During one interview Curtis tells David the
staff reported him calling out "Ellie" in
a bad dream and asks who she is.
David later sees a nearby TV advertisement
for "Life Extension", a company that specializes
in cryonic suspension, and realises he'd actually
called out the letters "L" and "E".
Under Curtis' and a police officer's guard,
David is taken to the Life Extension offices,
where salesclerk Rebecca (Tilda Swinton) explains
they freeze people just after the point of
death until a cure for their ailment is available
in the future, keeping their brain active
by placing them in a lucid dream state.
David becomes anxious and breaks free of Curtis,
realizing he is in his own lucid dream that
has gone wrong, and calls for tech support.
So there are at least 2 very ‘bog-standard’
interpretations: the explicit science fiction
premise of a wealthy, party-going youth who
goes through a tragic accident and signs away
his real life for a fantasy one.
Or, a common explanation for mysterious, mind-screwy
movies is the ‘coma-dream theory’.
For those unfamiliar with this: its a plot
twist that says ‘Oh, no.
All the events in this movie were made-up
by the main character in their head’.
If you want to overAnalyze, it utilizes a
motif of disconnection, fourth wall breaks,
pop culture references, and deception in order
to portray David Ames’s guilt over the death
of Julie Gianni and his dissociation with
reality.
We’re no Wisecrack, but I’d wager that
there is some Jungian archetypes employed
in the film, especially in regards to David
Ames, wearing a literal mask throughout the
film and the parallel ‘timelines’.
The Mask or “Persona”, to my understanding
is the personality you display in social gatherings
and is for-intents-and-purposes your ‘outside
person’.
Not to say that aspects are not true.
Simply that aspects of the Mask are there
to ensure your social survival.
David Ames is depicted as a somewhat sleazy,
fun-loving maverick who enjoys a drink and
parties.
His literal face becomes dismantled after
the car accident, leading to him being given
a ‘regenerative facial prosthesis’, a
mask, hiding the gruesome consequence.
He lives up to this conception with his fancy
furnishings such as his elevating television,
his absolutely gorgeous muscle car, and of
course his on-screen and implied debauchery.
A hedonist if you will.
Once his “Face” becomes disfigured, he
is left to fend for himself in a world that
has left him behind and sees nothing more
than a self-entitled, clingy, and emotionally
unstable shell of a man.
His true face beneath the mask, being ugly
and eventful is the reality of his life, no
longer filled with joy, pleasure, and spectacle.
Following his rejection by Sofia after the
club, he enters his delusionary world, where
he sinks back into the delusion: his face
no longer disfigured, his life now filled
with joy and young love with Sofia and no
more Julia Gianna.
But his guilt lingers and grows
The Shadow is a concept are the things we
hide due to dislike or discomfort.
In the ‘picturesque timeline’ wherein
David has his beautiful cheekbones and toothy
smile, he’s livin’ it up with Sofia, happy
and content.
However his guilt begins weighing in on him.
The distortions in sound and visuals throughout
the film are signs of this unconscious awareness.
With this onslaught of unconscious guilt comes
the re-emergence of JULIA GIANNA.
The woman he feels guilty for leading on and
inadvertantly killing her (or so he blames
himself).
This can be understood by his killing of “Julia-Sofia”
in the LucidDream, smothering her to death,
seeing her face replace the visage of Sofia
in all her pictures.
A grim reminder of his sins, and potentially
an unconscious fear that he will hurt Sofia
similarly and penancing survivor’s guilt.
David finds himself in the empty lobby of
the offices, and the man he saw earlier at
the bar appears, claiming to be David's tech
support from Life Extension, which is now
known as the Oasis Project.
They ride up in an elevator to the top of
an impossibly tall building, the height triggering
David's severe acrophobia.
The man explains that David has been in cryonic
sleep for 150 years.
David had opted for Life Extension's services
after struggling with his breakup with Sofia
and his disfigurement, and after securing
the publishing company to its associates,
proceeded to kill himself with a drug overdose;
Life Extension preserved his body and, as
David directed, put him into his lucid dream
starting from the drunken night when Sofia
left him, under the "vanilla sky" from a Monet
painting.
However, during his sleep, the dream went
horribly wrong and attempted to incorporate
elements from his subconscious, such as substituting
Julie for Sofia and creating a father-figure
in Curtis.
As they arrive at the top of the building,
the man offers David a choice: either to be
reinserted into the corrected lucid dream,
or return to the real world by taking a literal
leap of faith off the roof that will wake
him from his sleep.
David decides to wake up, ignoring the vision
of Curtis that his subconscious has brought
to life to talk him out of it.
David envisions Sofia and Brian to say his
goodbyes.
Conquering his final fear, David jumps off
the building, his life flashing before his
eyes, and whites out immediately before hitting
the ground.
A female voice commands him to "open your
eyes" (a recurring theme in the movie), and
the film ends with David opening his eyes.
There are two interpretations of the film:
the explicit science fiction premise wherein
a rich guy who is miserable decides to sign
away his real life for a fake, ideal fantasy
in a simulated dream world.
The other is that if the coma-dream: whether
dying in the car crash or being hospitalized
and in a coma, the events in the film are
a fiction made up by DAVID AMES.
There is the motif of the face through the
film.: in particular DAVID AMES’S.
His disfigurement after thecar accident years
tears down his lifestyle.
The hedonist is gone and so too his confidence.
Masks are common trope and a crucial aspect
of Jungian archetypes.
With Jung, the mask is everything you display
in your community.
In literature they are commonly used similarly
as a symbol of deception or a disguise, hiding
the truth.
The truth of the matter is arguably survivors
Guilt.
DAVID blames himself for the death of JULIA
GIANNA: his casual sexual relationship up-ended
by JULIA’S demand for something more, DAVID’S
distance, and his meeting with SOFIA and of
course the attempted murder-suicide.
JULIA’S words resonate with DAVID, her face
appears and haunts DAVID to sub an extent
that ends up smothering her.
Although it is revealed that it was in fact
SOFIA he killed, the murderous imagery affirms
DAVID’S guilt.